---
layout: post
title: Normalization Form
date: 2023-10-18 12:00:00-0400
description: An introduction to normalization form in database systems.
tags: normalization-form DB
categories: database
related_posts: false
giscus_comments: true
toc:
  sidebar: left
---

## What is Normalization Form?

Normalization form is a way of measuring the level of normalization of a relation in a database. There are five normal forms, each with their own set of rules. The normal forms are as follows:

- First Normal Form (1NF)
- Second Normal Form (2NF)
- Third Normal Form (3NF)
- Boyce-Codd Normal Form (BCNF)
- Fourth Normal Form (4NF)
- Fifth Normal Form (5NF)
- Domain-Key Normal Form (DKNF)

### First Normal Form (1NF)

A relation is in first normal form if it satisfies the following conditions:

- The relation has no repeating groups.
- The relation has a primary key.
- The relation has no composite/multi-valued attributes.

### Second Normal Form (2NF)

A relation is in second normal form if it satisfies the following conditions:

- The relation is in first normal form.
- There are no partial dependencies between non-key attributes and the primary key.

### Third Normal Form (3NF)

A relation is in third normal form if it satisfies the following conditions:

- The relation is in first normal form.
- There are no transitive dependencies between non-key attributes and the primary key.

3NF is a stronger form of 2NF. If a relation is in 3NF, it is also in 2NF.

### Boyce-Codd Normal Form (BCNF)

A relation is in Boyce-Codd normal form if it satisfies the following conditions:

## Generating 3NF Relations

1. If $$R\in$$ 3NF, then terminate.
2. If $$R_i\subseteq R$$ $$\notin$$ 3NF, which means $$Y\subseteq R_i$$ is a transitive dependency, $$Z\notin XY$$, and $$X\rightarrow Y$$, $$Y\rightarrow Z$$, $$Y\nrightarrow X$$, then $$R_{i,1} = YZ$$, $$R_{i,2} = R_i - Z$$, replace $$R_i$$ with $$R_{i,1}$$ and $$R_{i,2}$$.
3. repeat step 2 until all relations are in 3NF.

## Generating BCNF Relations

1. If $$R\in$$ BCNF, then terminate.
2. If $$R_i\subseteq R$$ $$\notin$$ BCNF, which means $$X\rightarrow Y$$ and $$X$$ is not a key, then $$R_{i,1} = R_i - Y$$, $$R_{i,2} = XY$$, replace $$R_i$$ with $$R_{i,1}$$ and $$R_{i,2}$$.
3. repeat step 2 until all relations are in BCNF.