---
layout: post
title: Markov Decision Process
date: 2024-02-28 00:00:00-0400
description: An introduction to Markov Decision Process (MDP) in reinforcement learning.
tags: rl
categories: reinforcement-learning
related_posts: false
giscus_comments: false
toc:
    sidebar: left
---

## Introduction

Markov Decision Process (MDP) is a mathematical framework used to model decision-making in situations where outcomes are partly random and partly under the control of a decision maker. MDP is used in reinforcement learning to model the environment and the agent's interaction with the environment.The MDP and the agent together form a sequence of states, actions, and rewards, known as a trajectory:

$$
S_0, A_0, R_1, S_1, A_1, R_2, \dots, S_T, A_T, R_{T+1}, \dots
$$

## Components of MDP

An MDP is defined by the following components:

- **State Space**: A set of all possible states in the environment. The state space can be discrete or continuous.
- **Action Space**: A set of all possible actions that the agent can take in the environment. The action space can be discrete or continuous.
- **Transition Probability**: A function that defines the probability of transitioning from one state to another state given an action.

$$
\begin{aligned}
p(s^{\prime},r\vert s,a) &\in [0,1] \\
p(s^{\prime} \vert s,a) &= \sum_{r} p(s^{\prime},r\vert s,a) \\
\end{aligned}\\
\sum_{s^{\prime}} \sum_{r} p(s^{\prime},r\vert s,a) = 1
$$

- **Reward Function**: A function that defines the reward the agent receives for taking an action in a particular state.

$$
\begin{aligned}
r(s,a) &= \sum_{r} r \sum_{s^{\prime}} p(s^{\prime},r\vert s,a) \in \mathbb{R} \\
r(s,a,s^{\prime}) &= \sum_{r} r p(r\vert s,a,s^{\prime})= \sum_{r} r \frac{p(s^{\prime},r\vert s,a)}{p(s^{\prime}\vert s,a)}
\end{aligned}
$$

- **Discount Factor**: A value between 0 and 1 that defines the importance of future rewards.
- **Policy**: A function that defines the agent's behavior in the environment.
- **Value Function**: A function that defines the expected cumulative reward the agent can achieve from a given state.
- **Q-function**: A function that defines the expected cumulative reward the agent can achieve from a given state-action pair.

## Markov Reward Process

The return in MDP is defined as the sum of discounted rewards:

$$
G_t = R_{t+1} + \gamma R_{t+2} + \gamma^2 R_{t+3} + \dots = \sum_{k=0}^{\infty} \gamma^k R_{t+k+1}
$$

where $$\gamma$$ is the discount factor, and $$R_{t+1}$$ is the reward at time step $$t+1$$, corresponding to the state-action pair $$(S_t, A_t)$$.

If $$\gamma = 0$$, the agent is myopic and only cares about the immediate reward. If $$\gamma = 1$$, the agent is far-sighted and cares about the long-term reward, but the sum may not converge.

Returns at different time steps are related as follows:

$$
\begin{aligned}
G_t &= R_{t+1} + \gamma(R_{t+2} + \gamma R_{t+3} + \dots) \\
&= R_{t+1} + \gamma G_{t+1}
\end{aligned}
$$

where time step $$t$$ is not the final time step, otherwise $$G_t = R_{t+1}$$. The next return of termination can be defined as $$G_{t+1} = 0$$.

## Policies and Value Functions

A policy $$\pi$$ is a mapping from states to actions. 

$$
\begin{aligned}
\pi(a\vert s) &= p(A_t = a \vert S_t = s) \\
p_{\pi}(s^{\prime}\vert s) &= \sum_{a} \pi(a\vert s) p(s^{\prime}\vert s,a) \\
r_{\pi}(s) &= \sum_{a} \pi(a\vert s) r(s,a) \\
\end{aligned}
$$

The value function $$v_{\pi}(s)$$ of a state $$s$$ under a policy $$\pi$$ is the expected return starting from state $$s$$ and following policy $$\pi$$:

$$
v_{\pi}(s) = \mathbb{E}_{\pi}[G_t \vert S_t = s]
$$

The action-value function $$q_{\pi}(s,a)$$ is the expected return starting from state $$s$$, taking action $$a$$, and then following policy $$\pi$$:

$$
q_{\pi}(s,a) = \mathbb{E}_{\pi}[G_t \vert S_t = s, A_t = a]
$$

Both value functions can be defined recursively in terms of each other:

- For state-value function:

$$
\begin{aligned}
v_{\pi}(s) &= \mathbb{E}_{\pi}[G_t \vert S_t = s] \\
&= \mathbb{E}_{\pi}[R_{t+1} + \gamma G_{t+1} \vert S_t = s] \\
&= \sum_{a} \pi(a\vert s) \sum_{s^{\prime},r} p(s^{\prime},r\vert s,a) [r + \gamma \mathbb{E}_{\pi}[G_{t+1} \vert S_{t+1} = s^{\prime}]] \\
&= \sum_{a} \pi(a\vert s) \sum_{s^{\prime},r} p(s^{\prime},r\vert s,a) [r + \gamma v_{\pi}(s^{\prime})]
\end{aligned}
$$

- For action-value function:

$$
\begin{aligned}
q_{\pi}(s,a) &= \mathbb{E}_{\pi}[G_t \vert S_t = s, A_t = a] \\
&= \mathbb{E}_{\pi}[R_{t+1} + \gamma G_{t+1} \vert S_t = s, A_t = a] \\
&= \sum_{s^{\prime},r} p(s^{\prime},r\vert s,a) [r + \gamma \mathbb{E}_{\pi}[G_{t+1} \vert S_{t+1} = s^{\prime}]] \\
&= \sum_{s^{\prime},r} p(s^{\prime},r\vert s,a) [r + \gamma v_{\pi}(s^{\prime})]
\end{aligned}
$$

- Relation between value functions:

$$
\begin{aligned}
v_{\pi}(s) &= \sum_{a} \pi(a\vert s) q_{\pi}(s,a) \\
q_{\pi}(s,a) &= \sum_{s^{\prime},r} p(s^{\prime},r\vert s,a) [r + \gamma \sum_{a^{\prime}} \pi(a^{\prime}\vert s^{\prime}) q_{\pi}(s^{\prime},a^{\prime})]
\end{aligned}
$$
