---
layout: post
title: Deep Q-Network
date: 2024-01-29 00:00:00-0400
description: An introduction to Deep Q-Network
tags: rl
categories: reinforcement-learning
related_posts: false
giscus_comments: false
toc:
    sidebar: left
---

## Q-Learning

Q-learning is a model-free reinforcement learning algorithm to learn a policy telling an agent what action to take under what circumstances by learning an action-value function $Q(s,a)$ that gives the expected utility of taking a given action $a$ in a given state $s$ under a policy $\pi$.

The Q-learning algorithm is as follows:

1. Initialize $Q(s,a)$ arbitrarily
2. Repeat (for each episode):
    1. Initialize $s$
    2. Repeat (for each step of episode):
        1. Choose $a$ from $s$ using policy derived from $Q$ (e.g., $\epsilon$-greedy)
        2. Take action $a$, observe $r$, $s'$
        3. $Q(s,a) \leftarrow Q(s,a) + \alpha [r + \gamma \max_{a'} Q(s',a') - Q(s,a)]$
        4. $s \leftarrow s'$
    3. until $s$ is terminal or truncated
3. until number of episodes reached or $Q$ has converged

## Deep Q-Network

Q-learning is enough to solve simple problems, but it fails when it comes to complex problems with continuous state space or action space, such as Atari games. And this is where Deep Q-Network (DQN) comes in.

DQN is a deep learning model that approximates the action-value function $Q(s,a)$ with a neural network. If the input is the state $s$, then the output is the action-value function $Q(s,a)$ for all possible actions $a$. And if the input is the state-action pair $(s,a)$, then the output is a scalar value $Q(s,a)$.

### Target Network

The problem with DQN is that the neural network is constantly changing, so the target $Q$ is also constantly changing. This makes the training unstable if we use the model to interact with the environment and train at each step.

Let the target network be $\hat{Q}$, and the training network be $Q$. The target network is a copy of the training network, but it is only updated every $C$ steps. The target network is used to calculate the target $Q$ for training, and the training network is used to calculate the current $Q$ for training. Given a state-action pair $(s,a)$, the reward $r$ and the next state $s^{\prime}$, the target network gives the target $\hat{Q}(s,a)$ as follows:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\hat{Q}(s,a) &= r + \gamma \hat{Q}(s^{\prime}, \pi(s^{\prime})) \\
&= r + \gamma \hat{Q}(s^{\prime}, \arg\max_{a^{\prime}} Q(s^{\prime}, a^{\prime})) \\
&= r + \gamma \max_{a^{\prime}} \hat{Q}(s^{\prime}, a^{\prime})
\end{aligned}
$$

And the training network gives the current evaluation $Q(s,a)$ to regress to the target $\hat{Q}(s,a)$. The loss function is the mean squared error between the target and the current evaluation:

$$
\begin{aligned}
L(\theta) &= \mathbb{E}_{(s,a,r,s^{\prime}) \sim U(D)} \left[ \left( \hat{Q}(s,a) - Q(s,a;\theta) \right)^2 \right] \\
&= \mathbb{E}_{(s,a,r,s^{\prime}) \sim U(D)} \left[ \left( r + \gamma \max_{a^{\prime}} \hat{Q}(s^{\prime}, a^{\prime}) - Q(s,a;\theta) \right)^2 \right]
\end{aligned}
$$

where $U(D)$ is the uniform distribution over the experience replay buffer $D$. The experience replay buffer is a finite-sized cache of the most recent experiences, used to store the experiences $(s,a,r,s^{\prime})$ and sample a batch of experiences from it to train the model.

## DDQN

In DQN, it is the target network that is used to choose the best action in the next state. But in fact, the training network can also be used to choose the best action in the next state. This is called Double DQN (DDQN).

The target network gives the target $\hat{Q}(s,a)$ as follows:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\hat{Q}(s,a) &= r + \gamma \hat{Q}(s^{\prime}, \arg\max_{a^{\prime}} Q(s^{\prime}, a^{\prime})) \\
\end{aligned}
$$
